book/a-tree-walk-interpreter.md, before:

With this part, we begin jlox, the first of our two interpreters. Programming
languages are a huge topic with piles of concepts and terminology to cram into
your brain all at once. There's theory -- though not too much in this book --
which requires a level of mental rigor that you probably haven't had to summon
since your last Calculus final.

*Implementing* an interpreter uses a few architectural tricks and design
patterns uncommon in other kinds of applications, so we'll be getting used to
the engineering side of things too. Given all of that, we'll keep the code we
have to write as simple and plain as possible.

In less than two thousand lines of clean Java code, we'll build a complete
interpreter for Lox that implements every single feature of the language,
exactly as we've specified. The first few chapters work front-to-back through
the phases of the interpreter -- [scanning][], [parsing][], and
[evaluating code][]. After that, we add language features one at a time,
growing a simple calculator into a full-fledged scripting language.

[scanning]: scanning.html
[parsing]: parsing-expressions.html
[evaluating code]: evaluating-expressions.html

Commit message:

Edit "The Lox Language" and "A Tree-Walk Interpreter".

book/a-tree-walk-interpreter.md, after:

With this part, we begin jlox, the first of our two interpreters. Programming
languages are a huge topic with piles of concepts and terminology to cram into
your brain all at once. Programming language theory requires a level of mental
rigor that you probably haven't had to summon since your last Calculus final.
(Fortunately there isn't too much theory in this book.)

Implementing an interpreter uses a few architectural tricks and design
patterns uncommon in other kinds of applications, so we'll be getting used to
the engineering side of things too. Given all of that, we'll keep the code we
have to write as simple and plain as possible.

In less than two thousand lines of clean Java code, we'll build a complete
interpreter for Lox that implements every single feature of the language,
exactly as we've specified. The first few chapters work front-to-back through
the phases of the interpreter -- [scanning][], [parsing][], and
[evaluating code][]. After that, we add language features one at a time,
growing a simple calculator into a full-fledged scripting language.

[scanning]: scanning.html
[parsing]: parsing-expressions.html
[evaluating code]: evaluating-expressions.html
