book/appendix-ii.md, before:

For your edification, here is the code produced by [the little script
we built][generator] to automate generating the syntax tree classes for jlox.

[generator]: representing-code.html#metaprogramming-the-trees

## Expressions

Expressions are the first syntax tree nodes we see, introduced in "[Representing
Code](representing-code.html)". The main Expr class defines the visitor
interface used to dispatch against the specific expression types, and contains
the other expression subclasses as nested classes:

^code expr

### Assign expression

Variable assignment is introduced in "[Statements and
State](statements-and-state.html#assignment)":

^code expr-assign

### Binary expression

Binary operators are introduced in "[Representing
Code](representing-code.html)":

^code expr-binary

### Call expression

Function call expressions are introduced in
"[Functions](functions.html#function-calls)":

^code expr-call

### Get expression

Property access, or "get" expressions are introduced in
"[Classes](classes.html#properties-on-instances)":

^code expr-get

### Grouping expression

Using parentheses to group expressions is introduced in "[Representing
Code](representing-code.html)":

^code expr-grouping

### Literal expression

Literal value expressions are introduced in "[Representing
Code](representing-code.html)":

^code expr-literal

### Logical expression

The logical `and` and `or` operators are introduced in "[Control
Flow](control-flow.html#logical-operators)":

^code expr-logical

### Set expression

Property assignment, or "set" expressions are introduced in
"[Classes](classes.html#properties-on-instances)":

^code expr-set

### Super expression

The `super` keyword is introduced in
"[Inheritance](inheritance.html#calling-superclass-methods)":

^code expr-super

### This expression

The `this` keyword is introduced in "[Classes](classes.html#this)":

^code expr-this

### Unary expression

Unary operators are introduced in "[Representing Code](representing-code.html)":

^code expr-unary

### Variable expression

Variable access expressions are introduced in "[Statements and
State](statements-and-state.html#variable-syntax)":

^code expr-variable

## Statements

Statements form a second hierarchy of syntax tree nodes independent of
expressions. We add the first couple of them in "[Statements and
State](statements-and-state.html)".

^code stmt

### Block statement

Curly-braced block statements to define local scopes are introduced in
"[Statements and State](statements-and-state.html#block-syntax-and-semantics)":

^code stmt-block

### Class statement

Class declaration statements are introduced in, unsurprisingly, "[Classes](classes.html#class-declarations)":

^code stmt-class

### Expression statement

Expression statements are introduced in "[Statements and
State](statements-and-state.html#statements)":

^code stmt-expression

### Function statement

Function declaration statements are introduced in, you guessed it, "[Functions](functions.html#function-declarations)":

^code stmt-function

### If statement

If statements are introduced in "[Control
Flow](control-flow.html#conditional-execution)":

^code stmt-if

### Print statement

Print statements are introduced in "[Statements and
State](statements-and-state.html#statements)":

^code stmt-print

### Return statement

You need a function to return from, so return statements are introduced in "[Functions](functions.html#return-statements)":

^code stmt-return

### Variable statement

Variable declaration statements are introduced in "[Statements and
State](statements-and-state.html#variable-syntax)":

^code stmt-var

### While statement

While statements are introduced in "[Control
Flow](control-flow.html#while-loops)":

^code stmt-while

Commit message:

Use code font for statement and expression types:
"for loop" -> "`for` loop", etc.

Also, make the inline code font use the same color and background as
normal text to make the above change less visually jarring.

Fix #717.

book/appendix-ii.md, after:

For your edification, here is the code produced by [the little script
we built][generator] to automate generating the syntax tree classes for jlox.

[generator]: representing-code.html#metaprogramming-the-trees

## Expressions

Expressions are the first syntax tree nodes we see, introduced in "[Representing
Code](representing-code.html)". The main Expr class defines the visitor
interface used to dispatch against the specific expression types, and contains
the other expression subclasses as nested classes:

^code expr

### Assign expression

Variable assignment is introduced in "[Statements and
State](statements-and-state.html#assignment)":

^code expr-assign

### Binary expression

Binary operators are introduced in "[Representing
Code](representing-code.html)":

^code expr-binary

### Call expression

Function call expressions are introduced in
"[Functions](functions.html#function-calls)":

^code expr-call

### Get expression

Property access, or "get" expressions are introduced in
"[Classes](classes.html#properties-on-instances)":

^code expr-get

### Grouping expression

Using parentheses to group expressions is introduced in "[Representing
Code](representing-code.html)":

^code expr-grouping

### Literal expression

Literal value expressions are introduced in "[Representing
Code](representing-code.html)":

^code expr-literal

### Logical expression

The logical `and` and `or` operators are introduced in "[Control
Flow](control-flow.html#logical-operators)":

^code expr-logical

### Set expression

Property assignment, or "set" expressions are introduced in
"[Classes](classes.html#properties-on-instances)":

^code expr-set

### Super expression

The `super` expression is introduced in
"[Inheritance](inheritance.html#calling-superclass-methods)":

^code expr-super

### This expression

The `this` expression is introduced in "[Classes](classes.html#this)":

^code expr-this

### Unary expression

Unary operators are introduced in "[Representing Code](representing-code.html)":

^code expr-unary

### Variable expression

Variable access expressions are introduced in "[Statements and
State](statements-and-state.html#variable-syntax)":

^code expr-variable

## Statements

Statements form a second hierarchy of syntax tree nodes independent of
expressions. We add the first couple of them in "[Statements and
State](statements-and-state.html)".

^code stmt

### Block statement

The curly-braced block statement that defines a local scope is introduced in
"[Statements and State](statements-and-state.html#block-syntax-and-semantics)":

^code stmt-block

### Class statement

Class declaration is introduced in, unsurprisingly,
"[Classes](classes.html#class-declarations)":

^code stmt-class

### Expression statement

The expression statement is introduced in "[Statements and
State](statements-and-state.html#statements)":

^code stmt-expression

### Function statement

Function declaration is introduced in, you guessed it,
"[Functions](functions.html#function-declarations)":

^code stmt-function

### If statement

The `if` statement is introduced in "[Control
Flow](control-flow.html#conditional-execution)":

^code stmt-if

### Print statement

The `print` statement is introduced in "[Statements and
State](statements-and-state.html#statements)":

^code stmt-print

### Return statement

You need a function to return from, so `return` statements are introduced in
"[Functions](functions.html#return-statements)":

^code stmt-return

### Variable statement

Variable declaration is introduced in "[Statements and
State](statements-and-state.html#variable-syntax)":

^code stmt-var

### While statement

The `while` statement is introduced in "[Control
Flow](control-flow.html#while-loops)":

^code stmt-while
